Acts 17, we're going to read in just a moment.
So we've seen how the apostles bring the good news of the gospel and evangelize audiences that have been steeped in Old Testament knowledge familiar with Joel's prophecies and the writings of David and Moses and so on.
But what happens when the gospel comes to a city like Athens?
We saw a little bit of a glimpse of this when we looked at the gospel going into Lister, which is the first sort of fully pagan audience that shows up in the book of Acts.
Here again in the book of Athens, nobody's quoting Isaiah in Athens.
So the apostles have quoted Isaiah freely in previous sermons, usually around the synagogues, where there are devout Gentiles and Jews there.
Nobody knows Isaiah.
Nobody's quoting Isaiah.
Nobody probably even knows who he is.
Paul calls this city.
So Paul's first impression, he's just
Walk through Athens, his first impression is it's a city filled with idols.
Matter of fact, that word filled, it's a combination word.
It's got idols and the prefix to the word idols is under cate, under idols.
It's submerged, under buried under idols.
One Roman writer in the first century named Petronius, he said, it's easier to find a God than a man in Athens.
So we're a long way from Jerusalem.
We're a long way from the places where scripture is quoted freely.
So how does the gospel come to a place like this?
Athens had never heard of the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
Matter of fact, when Paul first brings it up, we'll see this in a second.
He brings it up in verse 18.
And when he refers to Jesus and the resurrection, they think he's introducing two new deities.
One named Jesus.
and maybe his wife named Resurrection, Anastasis.
One's feminine and one is masculine, Jesus is masculine, Anastasis is feminine.
So they think there's a God he's proponing named Jesus, and there's a God he's propounding, sort of a new power couple on the scene, on the divine scene, and it's Jesus and the resurrection.
That's how ignorant they are, how biblically illiterate they are.
So how do you bring the gospel to a place like this?
We're gonna see
what God's word, what this good news brings by way of perspective and insight and salvation to a city brimming with idols submerged in idols.
I'll begin reading in verse 16.
Now while Paul was waiting for them at Athens, his spirit was provoked within him as he saw that the city was full of idols.
So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the devout persons and in the marketplace every day with those who happened to be there.
Some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also conversed with him and some said, what does this babbler wish to say?
Others said he seems to be a preacher of foreign divinities because he was preaching Jesus and the resurrection.
And they took him and brought him to the Ariapagos saying, may we know what this new teaching is that you are presenting?
for you bring some strange things to our ears.
We wish to know therefore what these things mean.
Now all the Athenians and the foreigners who lived there would spend their time in nothing except telling or hearing something new.
So Paul, standing in the midst of the Ariapagos, said, men of Athens, I perceive that in every way you are very religious, for as I passed along and observed the objects of your worship, I also found an altar with this inscription to the unknown God.
What therefore you worship as unknown, this I proclaim to you, the God who made the world and everything in it being Lord of heaven and earth does not live in temples made by man.
He's standing in the shadow of the Parthenon.
Does not live in temples made by man, nor is he served by human hands as though he needed anything since he himself gives to all mankind life.
and breath, and everything.
And he, this God, made from one man, every nation of mankind to live on the face of the earth, having determined a lot of periods and the boundaries of their dwelling place, that they should seek God and perhaps feel their way toward him and find him, yet he is actually not far from each one of us.
For in him we live and move and have our being.
He's quoting well-known poet Epiminides.
And as some of your poets have said,
For we are indeed his offspring.
He's quoting a well-known poet, Aratus, verse 29.
Being then God's offspring, we ought not to think that divine being is like gold or silver or stone, an image formed by the art and imagination of man.
The times of ignorance God has overlooked, but now he commands all people everywhere to repent because he has fixed a day on which he will judge the world in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed.
and of this he has given assurance to all by raising him, that man, that is, from the dead.
Now, when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked, but others said, we will hear you again about this.
So Paul went out from their midst, but some men joined him and believed, among whom also were Dionysius the Ariapagite and a woman named Damaris and others with him.
So idolatry is a global
phenomenon.
John Calvin said, man's nature is a perpetual factory of idols.
And this chapter sets before us in shed's light on how the gospel meets idolatry, how the gospel engages and even confronts a many God's culture.
More specifically, this chapter is a clinic on how to bring the gospel to people without a Judeo-Christian framework.
Because here again, Paul doesn't come parachuting in with his Old Testament under his arm.
He doesn't come talking about Old Testament prophecies and talking about how Jesus propitiated God's wrath and using all this big, highfalutin language.
He's not talking about you so that by faith you can receive the imputed righteousness of Jesus and be justified and the eschological verdict is brought forward.
He's not getting into any of that stuff.
He's going to talk about that in Romans, but not here.
They don't grasp this.
And so we're seeing a model, a paradigm for how you bring the gospel to a culture without that biblical worldview, without this biblical theological framework that we can so often assume, especially in our culture.
If Paul just parachutes into Athens and brings the exact same message he would have brought to Jerusalem, one, they'd probably be completely confused.
Two, they might, if they might just add Jesus to their existing list of gods.
So he's got to go further back.
He's got to build everything from the ground up.
He's got to lay some foundations of a biblical worldview.
And so he begins in that way.
And I think we can assume the same thing living in our culture.
We can assume everybody knows what we're talking about.
But we live in a culture, friends, which is increasingly unaware, unfamiliar with the basic rudiments of Christian faith.
the basic rudiments of the biblical gospel.
We can assume that when we use words like God, spirituality, faith, they know what we're talking about.
As if we define those terms in the same way.
When we talk about sin, when we talk about faith and spirituality and God and the Holy Spirit and so on, we might not mean the same thing by that.
Those words are all up for grabs now.
Any clip from Oprah will suffice.
Just grab one and watch it.
And you can see the way in which these words are being redirected, new contents being imported into them, pagan content.
And in that way Paul's message here to Athens is instructive for us in our own culture.
But before we get to Paul's message, we see something of the motivation and the method.
that he brings, his motive and his method.
So if you're wondering why Paul is in Athens in the first place, you just have to read earlier in the chapter than where we began to find out that things went sideways when they got to Thessalonica, they preached the gospel, riots broke out, same thing happened when they got to Berea.
So bad, and Paul was in the crosshairs, he was the primary target of all this hostility and anger, and so they put him on a boat as fast as they could and said, get to Athens.
And Paul said, I will, but you need to come and get there as fast as you can.
I'll wait for you there.
get to me as fast as you can.
And he instructs them in that way in verse 15.
And so right there in verse 16, we find Paul is just waiting.
You're just doing this, waiting in Athens.
Probably not necessarily, there's no indication that he's necessarily planning to get out there and speak to anybody.
He's waiting for Paul, he's writing, waiting for Silas and Timothy right there in verse 16.
Look at it.
Now while Paul was waiting for them in Athens, his spirit was provoked within him.
as he saw that the city was full of idols.
You get the impression at the beginning of verse 16, Paul's just sitting there waiting.
By the end of verse 16, he's planning to preach.
There's this motivation, there's this rising sensation and this passion and this zeal.
And what does the zeal attach to?
A desire for the glory of God.
And he's not getting glory.
here, and there's evidence all around me.
Other gods are getting the glory that belongs to Jesus, and that's not okay.
That's the motivation for mission throughout the Bible.
That is the primary motivation for mission.
This is in your notes.
Paul doesn't view Athens as a tourist enamored with his art, but as a Christian dismayed by its idolatry.
He's not walking around paying homage in respect to the great angles and lines on the face of Zeus or whatever statue he's looking at.
He sees it as a substitute God.
Something wrong in the world as Paul looks at Athens, the summer of 2014, I had the privilege of traveling with my oldest son, Hunter.
two Athens.
There was a missions conference that was being held there.
A number of you were there as well.
We all went over to serve and watched kids of missionaries in that part of the world and the lead in worship and pray for them and all kinds of things were happening there.
We got to have this one sort of tour day where we went to Athens.
And so my son and I were walking around, we're seeing all the things, just impressive structures everywhere and some of the remnants of things that were here in the first century.
And we walked around and we finally found the place, Mars Hill, we found the place where perhaps this message was preached.
And it was so, so powerful to stand there and opened up my Bible.
And I read this text as Paul began with these words right there in verse 22.
So Paul standing in the midst of the Ariapagos and that's where exactly where we were.
And I read men of Athens, I perceive that in every way you are very
religious, for as I passed along and observed the objects of your worship, and I read through the whole rest of this sermon, and having just seen the remnants of those very objects of worship, it wasn't hard to imagine Paul standing in the shadow of the great Parthenon where there would have been at his time, there would have been a massive statue of Athena,
gold and ivory statue of Athena.
They said that you could see the tip of Athena's spear gleaming at 40 miles out.
And here's Paul standing in the shadow of the Parthenon saying, this doesn't get you anywhere.
Talk about a medicine gospel.
He is confronting the idolatry of the culture around them.
When Paul was there in the first century,
The Parthenon wasn't a museum where people were walking around shooting pictures.
It was a functioning temple built for the worship of the gods.
And to Paul, this is not okay.
This idolatry has to be addressed.
And that has been the primary motivating factor behind missions since the first century.
The great Scottish theologian.
18th century, 19th century, Scottish theologian PT Forsyth wrote these words.
The main spring of missions is not pity, but faith.
Not so much pity for perishing sinners as faith and zeal for the crown rights of Christ.
That's why we've so often said as a church that worship is both the fuel of mission and the goal of mission.
This is what mission is all about.
It was a group of
Passionate missionaries known as the Moravians in the early 1700s, and they started just as an evidence of their passion.
They started this round-the-clock 24-hour prayer vigil in 1727.
Guess how long they prayed.
Unbroken prayer vigil for 100 years.
65 years into that prayer vigil.
By that point, they had already sent out 300 missionaries to unreach parts of the world.
Talk about missionary.
And what was it that was propelling them, compelling them to go into dangerous places?
Very dangerous places.
Matter of fact, 20 out of 29 of them died in the earliest years of their arrival.
What motivated them?
Well, the first two missionaries tell you the motivation of the Moravians.
Because the first two missionaries got on a boat, they look back at the shore, and they said to their friends, perhaps probably going to see them for the last time.
They said, may the lamb that was slain receive the reward of his suffering.
It was propelled by a vision to see Jesus get the glory Jesus deserves.
Henry Martin, missionary to Muslims in Persia in the early 1800s, he revealed his primary motivation when he wrote these words, I could not endure existence if Jesus was not glorified.
It would be hell to me if he were to be always dishonored.
And here's Paul, looking around at a city submerged in idols and he has moved, his spirit is moved within him.
There's this rising up because false gods are getting glory that rightly belongs to Jesus, the king.
Note how he responds though.
So this is in your notes.
Paul neither smashes the images nor boils over in prophetic rage.
Instead, he reasons with him.
He's not an iconoclast.
He doesn't go grab a hammer and start smashing the idol, literally breaking them down.
He doesn't deface the images of the idols and the images around him.
No, he reasons with him.
He opens up a conversation, a dialogue.
He says, I perceive.
How diplomatic is that?
I perceive that you are very religious.
He doesn't lead with you bunch of idolaters.
He says, so I perceive.
I'm just kind of gathering here.
It looks like you're very religious.
And then he says, I noticed this altar to an unknown God.
And then he starts quoting their poets, secular poets, epiminities and erities.
What's he doing?
He's looking for common ground.
He's looking for a handle for an access point.
He's looking to build rapport with the people.
He's not snubbing his nose.
He's not coming in like a bull in a China closet.
He wants to begin to reason with him to converse with him.
And so we see something of,
of this God-centered motivation.
Paul's spirit is stirred about the idols that he sees around him, and then we see something about his method.
So he's taking it in, he's looking, he's observing the culture, he's finding common ground, he's drawing them out into conversation to reason with him, which then brings us finally to the message.
So the motivation and the method and now the message.
Given his audience,
Paul starts his gospel at the very beginning, offering them a crash course in basic theology.
Now, just to say something that we've probably said a couple of times before in this study, and that is that Luke is not providing full transcripts of all these sermons.
In which case, all the sermons in the book of Acts are two to three minutes long.
I mean, it takes you 85 seconds.
I doubt that Paul was finished with the Athens audience that he had gathered around him in 85 seconds.
This was a summary.
These are sort of, this is the worship guide.
This is the listening guide that you're seeing here.
These are the high points.
Matter of fact, Bruce Milney, one New Testament commentator, shows 17 distinct theological assertions that Paul makes in this sermon.
And probably under each one of those 17, he had things to say.
He was unpacking.
He was helping them grasp these big ideas.
And Luke is giving us just a quick thumbnail sketch.
So rather than going to all 17, which was my initial thought a few days back,
And I thought, well, I think we'll be there all day.
So rather than do all 17, I've kind of grouped them under four main headings, which incidentally spelled the word car with an extra R at the end.
So car, beginning with creation.
Number one, creation, the God who made it all.
So we know this is true then, it's true now.
Everybody's got a worldview.
Whether we know it or not, whether we articulate it fully or not, everybody's got some way of putting the world together, some way of explaining and making sense of the world around us.
And the Christian worldview begins with what scripture teaches about creation.
This is a huge beginning point.
Now again, it's not necessary for Paul to go into the doctrine of creation or Peter to go into the doctrine of creation when he's talking at the synagogues because they share that.
I mean, they believe in the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
You've got a lot of common ground that you're just beginning with.
They believe the Old Testament Scriptures were inspired by God.
And you've got lots of places to begin, who God is, basically what he's like, the moral framework of the Ten Commandments.
You've got all that in previous audiences.
You got none of that here in Athens.
So he's got to go further back.
He can't just beeline it to Jesus and to the cross.
He's got to go further back and build this thing from the ground up.
The Epicureans and the Stoics, which kind of feature here toward the beginning of the passage, you see that they show up on the scene in verse 18, they don't share any of that Judeo-Christian worldview.
The Epicureans, when it comes to God, their thought about God is that God was just radically distant from the world, completely detached and aloof from the world.
And the Stoics had a completely opposite
worldview from the Epicurean.
So how are you going to reach an audience where these guys think that God is absolutely distant, these guys are pantheists.
They think that God's essence is shot through creation itself and in us divinity lives.
One is radically imminent.
God is here and he's in here.
He's in the chairs.
He's among us.
He's in the rocks and the trees.
And the other is God is nowhere to be found.
He's thousands of miles away, probably not even here in this conversation.
And so Paul has
a varied audience.
And yet Paul is able to say, he's able to walk that line right between them and say, there's something that both of you are saying that is in one sense right.
And there's something that both of you are saying that is in a more meaningful sense wrong.
So Epicureans, you're right in the sense that God has transcended.
Yes, he's huge.
He's bigger than the earth.
He's bigger than the world.
He's not distant and he's not impersonal.
He's not far from any of you.
He says that in just a few moments.
And Stoics, you're right in that God is imminent.
Yes, he's here.
He's not far from our reach.
He is here and among us, but he is distinct from his creation.
It's not that God and creation are of one essence.
God made everything in the world.
He created the world and everything in it.
The world is outside of him.
He's objective.
to the world.
You're both right and you're both wrong.
And so Paul divides the world into two categories.
He divides everything into two categories.
There's God and everything else.
That's a biblical worldview.
God and everything else.
And that everything else depends on God.
And God doesn't depend on the everything else.
You see that verse 24.
The God who made the world and everything in it
Being Lord of heaven and earth does not live in temples made by man.
And he goes on to emphasize, not only did this God create the world, but he sustains the world.
It says, he gives verse 25, look at that.
He gives to all mankind life and breath and everything.
Notice it doesn't say he gave.
You know, in the past, he sort of wound up the watch.
He gave life at the beginning, and now we're here to perpetuate it.
No, he is actively giving.
Right now, he is, Paul is looking out at his audience, and this is true for us as well.
If there's breath in your lungs right now, every breath you breathe, that one, and that one, God is actively giving it to you now.
He sustains all life.
This is a thoroughly biblical worldview, and so Paul brings in, and he says, in him we live,
and move and have our being."
He's quoting their poet at that point.
God actively sustains the world.
He is presently giving them life.
Now, there are some, it comes to meddlesome, there are some unsettling implications to this doctrine of creation.
We don't, in our culture, we don't necessarily feel warm inside when we're told that God is supplying every breath that we breathe, every movement that we make.
God is providential over all of it.
That's not a warm thought because that makes me feel that I'm not my own.
That makes me feel dependent.
It's not a popular word in our culture.
We love independence.
And that sounds like dependence.
The question that consumes the mind of people in our culture, we live in a me-centered culture, don't we?
There's giant eye.
That's our God.
The question that consumes the minds of a me center culture, our feet hit the floor apart from the grace of God saying, am I happy?
That's our fundamental question.
Am I happy?
And what or who is standing in the way of it?
If I'm not happy, what or who is standing in the way?
What's got to go today in order to make me happy?
That's how we come.
That's how we greet today.
But if God made me
then God is in charge.
He is the potter.
I am the clay.
If I am currently alive because of God's benevolence and grace, if God is sustaining my life and my breath and everything, I have someone to thank.
I have praised to render.
I belong
to another which suggests that instead of waking up in the morning, my feet hit in the floor, and I'm asking the question, am I happy yet?
My feet should hit the floor and say, God, why did you make me?
What would you have me do today?
In other words, we don't build our identity from scratch.
We belong to God.
We've been designed by a designer.
That leads to a related truth.
We're going to learn a theological term here, number two.
Aseity, A-S-E-I-T-Y, Aseity, the God who needs nothing.
So the doctrine of Aseity comes from Latin words meaning from himself.
And so it teaches, basically Aseity teaches that there's only one being in the universe who needs nothing outside of himself and that being is God.
He is the only one who's truly independent in the truest sense of the word.
The triune God needs nothing.
Look at verse 24, the second half of verse 24.
Being Lord of heaven and earth does not live in temples made by man, verse 25.
Nor is he served by human hands.
That word served comes from the word from which we get the word therapy.
So God doesn't have wounds that we're healing.
He's not served.
Creation isn't loneliness therapy for God.
He's not served by human hands.
He goes on to say, as though he needed
anything since he himself gives to all mankind life and breath and everything.
This is therapeutic for us to hear.
God doesn't need you.
God doesn't need me.
There's not a hole in his heart that only you can fill.
That's not the nature of the God creation, God humanity relationship, which raises the question why did God create the world in the first place?
Because maybe we live under the thought or notion that creation was this backscratcher that God made so that he could reach that part of his back that was inaccessible to him.
So he created the world because I've been lonely for a billion years.
I need someone to talk to.
Adam, Eve, here we go.
Now I'm suddenly happy.
That's not a biblical doctrine of creation.
Why did God make the world?
Why does creation exist?
Paul's emphasis is absolutely clear.
God didn't create this world because he's lonely.
Contrary to early Babylonian myths, trying to answer this question, God, Marduk was thought to have created the world so that the gods could have a workforce.
People to do all their work for them, so the gods could have slaves.
No, biblically, God freely created the world.
It wasn't created out of necessity.
Contrary to early pagan thought, it wasn't an emanation from God.
It just automatically proceeded from him like rays of light from the sun.
That's not the biblical doctrine of creation.
He freely created.
He didn't have to create.
He chose to create.
In eternity past, what was God doing before he created the world?
He was enjoying the fellowship of the Trinity.
That's what he was doing.
Jesus says that.
It's his final prayer, John chapter 17.
Father, glorify me with the glory I had with you before the world existed.
It's an awesome thought to think of this mutual admiration society of love and affirmation within the Godhead for eternity and creation was God inviting us into that joy.
It is God sharing, not sucking life out of the creation that He just made.
It's God sharing joy with His creation, with humanity.
Now, C.S.
Lewis captures that so beautifully in the creation account of the Chronicles of Narnia, where what does He picture the creation as?
He pictures it as Aslan singing the world into existence.
Theologian Thomas Freiner says, creation is God's joy going public.
That's awesome.
What's Paul saying to the many God's culture of Athens?
He's saying, God isn't needy.
He's saying, God didn't create the world so he could have you.
He created the world so you could have him.
Changes everything.
It's a biblical doctrine of creation.
There are meddlesome aspects to both creation and a seity.
The meddlesome aspect and implication of creation is you belong to him.
You're his by right of creation.
And the meddlesome implication of a seity is you can't barter with him because he doesn't need anything that you have.
He doesn't need your sacrifices.
That doesn't scratch the itch that he can't reach.
He doesn't need us.
Paul writes in Romans, chapter 11, who has given God a gift that he should be repaid for from him and through him and to him?
are all things to Him be glory.
Paul says to the Corinthian churches, why do you boast?
You've been given all these gifts and he says, and yet you boast as if you hadn't received gifts.
Paul goes on to say, God is not far away from them.
verse 26 and following.
God's not far away.
He's even providentially arranged things.
You see that in verse 26.
He's even providentially arranged things like where you live here in Athens.
So that to the end that you might seek him and find him and find that he is a personal God who's not far, he's not out of reach.
And so these first two aspects come hand in glove, creation and a seity.
And the next two come hand in glove as well.
Resurrection, beginning with resurrection.
To the God who appointed Jesus Christ as savior and judge.
Look at verse 29.
Being then God's offspring, we ought not to think that the divine being is like gold or silver or stone, an image formed by the art and imagination of man.
The times of ignorance, God has overlooked.
Is he surely?
Paul is not implying that we, in Athens, the city of Socrates, Plato and Aristotle are ignorant.
You see how medicine, this gospel hits.
He's saying the times of ignorance, God has overlooked.
But now, verse 30, he commands
all people everywhere to repent, because he has fixed a day on which he will judge the world in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed, and of this he has given assurance to all by raising him from the dead."
Now, when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked, but others said, we will hear you again about this.
Now you see back in verse 18, Paul had been associated with preaching foreign divinities.
You see that word there, foreign divinities.
If you knew anything about earlier history in Athens, this was not a phrase you wanted associated with you.
The great Socrates himself was accused of preaching foreign divinities right before he had to drink the hemlock and was poisoned and executed.
It was the very same charge.
Likely in the very same place.
And so here he is in Athens being brought to the Ariapagos under these same kinds of charges.
And yet Paul's boldness is absolutely amazing.
Beyond that, so not only does Paul continue to talk about Jesus and the resurrection, he's bringing up the resurrection.
And in doing that, he is going against the founding charter of the Ariapagos itself.
What's in these words?
In the fifth century BC,
a play by the Athenian dramatist, Escalus, which would have been well known in Paul's day.
In that play, the god Apollo inaugurates the court of the Ariapagos.
And one of the things that he says solemnly and as it were bindingly is that quote.
This is the god Apollo speaking, when a man dies and his blood is spilled on the ground, there is no resurrection.
At the founding,
Of the Ariapagos, resurrection is ruled out.
These are the ground rules.
We don't believe in that junk here.
Haven't since the moment we cut the ribbon.
And yet Paul walks into the Ariapagos and preaches the resurrection.
The language of the resurrection was taboo, but there's only one problem.
You can't preach the gospel without the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
manifestly clear.
You cannot preach the gospel apart from Christ's resurrection.
It's at the very heart of the good news of the faith.
And given what Paul says elsewhere about the resurrection, other places in his writings, we know how to fill in what Luke's summary is here.
We know what Paul says about this truth.
of the resurrection, and we can practically hear Him if we're familiar with what He writes in other places.
We can practically hear Him talking about the arrival of Jesus the God-man coming to earth, living a perfect life of obedience, suffering under Pontius Pilate, going to the cross and being crucified and buried and raised again on the third day.
And we know what Paul believes about that resurrection, that God raised this Jesus and in so doing
God installed him on the highest throne of the universe.
He is king over all the kings.
He is Lord over all the lords.
Every knee will bow before the risen king, Jesus.
And the one who rules over all kings and kingdoms will return and judgment will come with him.
God has appointed a man.
That's what Paul is saying right here.
He's appointed a man.
He's fixed a day and judgment will rise and fall on what
people do with that risen vindicated Savior, namely Jesus.
And judgment will happen, and every knee will bow before Him, because this same Jesus who died and was raised is set to return, and in His return, He will set everything right.
Everything in the world will be put right.
That's the doctrine of the return of Jesus.
Everything in this world that feels like it's
wrong or backwards, upside down, out of joint.
All of that will be set right.
All sin, all evil, all the stolen innocence.
Every time it looked like evil rose up and justice looked the other way, Jesus will set that right.
He comes again to make it right as the prophet of old had said, every mountain.
shall be brought low.
Every valley shall be raised up, and all the crooked places will be made straight."
This is what Messiah comes and does in His return.
And there's salvation in no other name.
We know Paul preaches us.
There's no salvation anywhere other than in Jesus Christ.
And whoever comes to this risen Lord and reaches out to use the language of Acts 17, whoever reaches out for this risen Lord by faith is saved, and whoever defies Him will be broken by His judgment.
So there's metal some truth in there, isn't there?
You think about that for our own lives.
Have you responded to the gospel of the truth about Jesus Christ?
There is no good reason to face the judgment of a holy God, not when we've been offered complete mercy.
full forgiveness for all of our sins through the death of Jesus Christ.
Some of the prophets sometimes in the Old Testament would say, why will you die on the house of Israel?
There's mercy like this.
Respond, turn from self rule, turn from sin, turn from broken saviors and false hopes.
Turn to this Savior.
He's the only one who can save.
He will save if we turn to Him.
And that's where Paul goes next.
He doesn't leave anybody wondering what's their next move.
Number four, repentance.
The God who commands exclusive allegiance.
Verse 30, the times of ignorance God overlooked, but now he commands all people everywhere to repent.
You talk about meddlesome.
The word repent is reserved for sarcasm in our culture.
It's a sneer word.
The only time you hear it on TV is maybe
Saturday Night Live, the church lady might use it.
It's a sneer word, it's a sarcasm word.
And not only is Paul not embarrassed of the word repentance, he asserts that God has the audacity to command repentance from every person on the planet.
He commands, Paul's words, all people everywhere to repent.
That's a meddlesome word to Athens.
That's a meddlesome word to American culture.
Drunk on self-exaltation as we are.
We are not okay with a God who commands repentance.
The least you could do is say, please, commands repentance?
Give me a break.
Look, I loved it when you told me about his love.
and about all the blessings that I could have and all the joy and all the grace, but you lost me when you said he commands that I turn from my idols and I turn from myself and embrace Jesus as Lord.
As long as it sounds like God is our peer, God is our friend, we're good.
We have warm thoughts toward him, but when he starts commanding repentance, everything changes.
All the warmth leaves the room.
You know, Paul,
He doesn't lead with what's attractive and hide what's not attractive from the culture, which is another way of saying Paul is not ashamed of the gospel.
He's not ashamed of the gospel.
Why?
Because it's the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes to the Jew first and also to the Greek.
It's the only message that's saved for Paul.
It's all about clarity.
and faithfulness to the message he received.
He said, I delivered to you what I also received.
He has an obligation to deliver the same message he heard.
For Paul, he's not fixated on what's gonna get him the most conversions, what's gonna fill the most seats, what's gonna get him the most ministry contributions.
It's all about clearly upholding the truth of the gospel.
Paul is gonna speak later.
about the varied impacts of the gospel on every culture in the world.
He says the message that we preached is at once a fragrance of life and a stench of death.
It's both.
In a profound way, every culture on earth will hear in the gospel something beautiful and something distasteful, something which as Wesley said is music in the sinner's ear,
and something that bids them come and die, bids them come and take up their cross and follow him.
Church, our task is to preach the gospel faithfully.
It's not to micromanage the effects.
Paul walks away with very few believers here.
They all hit the doors when he starts talking about resurrection and the implications of the resurrection.
Out they go, the exits are full and a few believe.
You get the impression, the others are verbally heckling him.
He's not trying to micromanage the effects he's trying to clearly and faithfully share the message of the gospel.
Our cult, our cult, friends, church members, is not to rage in prophetic zeal against the world.
It's not to antagonize the culture with all the hardest doctrines that we have.
It's not to do that, but neither is our cult to modify the gospel either.
It's not to remove those aspects that are distasteful to the world.
Any effort to improve the gospel distorts the gospel.
Any effort to improve the gospel robs it of its saving power.
Hold it out like it is and watch what happens.
That's our call.
Incidentally, the reason that our gospel proclamation must be accompanied by the power of the Holy Spirit is precisely because this news doesn't fall naturally and friendly on the ears of a sinful world.
There are offensive elements in the gospel.
So we should expect that.
It's deeply offensive in some way to every culture on the planet.
The gospel message has a confrontational word to every culture on the planet.
Paul said, Jews look for signs.
Greeks seek wisdom, right?
Think about our own context.
Baby boomers want the good life.
Postmoderns want the new tolerance, but we preach Christ and Him crucified.
And this is the power of God and the wisdom of God and the salvation of God of friends.
May we be faithful to preach this and no other gospel, no distorted, no improved gospel, the one we've received from biblical revelation.